---
title: Defining the Core Web Vitals metrics thresholds
subhead: The research and methodology behind Core Web Vitals thresholds
authors:
  - bmcquade
description: The research and methodology behind Core Web Vitals thresholds
date: 2020-05-21
updated: 2020-05-27
hero: /vitals/web-vitals-hero.png
alt: The research and methodology behind Core Web Vitals thresholds
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - performance
  - web-vitals
---

[Core Web Vitals](/vitals/#core-web-vitals) are a set of field metrics that
measure important aspects of real-world user experience on the web. Core Web
Vitals includes metrics, as well as target thresholds for each metric, which
help developers qualitatively understand whether the experience of their site is
"good", "needs improvement", or is "poor". This post will explain the approach used to
choose thresholds for Core Web Vitals metrics generally, as well as how the
thresholds for each specific Core Web Vitals metric were chosen.

## Refresher: Core Web Vitals metrics and thresholds

In 2020 the Core Web Vitals are three metrics: Largest Contentful Paint (LCP),
First Input Delay (FID), and Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS). Each metric measures
a different aspect of user experience: LCP measures perceived load speed and
marks the point in the page load timeline when the page's main content has
likely loaded; FID measures responsiveness and quantifies the experience users
feel when trying to first interact with the page; and CLS measures visual
stability and quantifies the amount of unexpected layout shift of visible page
content.

Each Core Web Vitals metric has associated thresholds, which categorize
performance as either "good", "needs improvement", or "poor":

<div class="w-stack w-stack--center w-stack--md">
  <img src="/vitals/lcp_ux.svg" width="400px" height="350px"
       alt="Largest Contentful Paint threshold recommendations">
  <img src="/vitals/fid_ux.svg" width="400px" height="350px"
       alt="First Input Delay threshold recommendations">
  <img src="/vitals/cls_ux.svg" width="400px" height="350px"
       alt="Cumulative Layout Shift threshold recommendations">
</div>

<div class="w-table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>&nbsp;</th>
      <th>Good</th>
      <th>Poor</th>
      <th>Percentile</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Largest Contentful Paint</td>
      <td>≤2500ms</td>
      <td>>4000ms</td>
      <td>75</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>First Input Delay</td>
      <td>≤100ms</td>
      <td>>300ms</td>
      <td>75</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td> Cumulative Layout Shift</td>
      <td>≤0.1</td>
      <td>>0.25</td>
      <td>75</td>
    </tr>
</table>

Additionally, to classify the overall performance of a page or site, we use the
75th percentile value of all page views to that page or site. In other words, if
at least 75 percent of page views to a site meet the "good" threshold, the site
is classified as having "good" performance for that metric. Conversely, if at
least 25 percent of page views meet the "poor" threshold, the site is classified
as having "poor" performance. So, for example, a 75th percentile LCP of 2
seconds is classified as "good", while a 75th percentile LCP of 5 seconds is
classified as "poor".

## Criteria for the Core Web Vitals metric thresholds

When establishing thresholds for Core Web Vitals metrics, we first identified
criteria that each threshold had to meet. Below, I explain the criteria we used
at Google for evaluating 2020 Core Web Vitals metric thresholds. The subsequent
sections will go into more detail on how these criteria were applied to select
the thresholds for each metric in 2020. In future years we anticipate making
improvements and additions to the criteria and thresholds to further improve our
ability to measure great user experiences on the web.

### High-quality user experience

Our primary goal is to optimize for the user and their quality of experience.
Given this, we aim to ensure that pages that meet the Core Web Vitals "good"
thresholds deliver a high quality user experience.

To identify a threshold associated with high-quality user experience, we look to
human perception and HCI research. While this research is sometimes summarized
using a single fixed threshold, we find that the underlying research is
typically expressed as a range of values. For example, research on the amount of
time users typically wait before losing focus is sometimes described as 1
second, while the underlying research is actually expressed as a range, from
hundreds of milliseconds to multiple seconds. The fact that perception
thresholds vary depending on user and context is further supported by aggregated
and anonymized Chrome metrics data, which shows that there is not a single
amount of time users wait for a web page to display content before aborting the
page load. Rather, this data shows a smooth and continuous distribution. For a
more in depth look at human perception thresholds and relevant HCI research, see
[The Science Behind Web
Vitals](https://blog.chromium.org/2020/05/the-science-behind-web-vitals.html).

In cases where relevant user experience research is available for a given metric
and there is reasonable consensus on the range of values in the literature, we
use this range as an input to guide our threshold selection process. In cases
where relevant user experience research is unavailable, such as for a new metric
like Cumulative Layout Shift, we instead evaluate real-world pages that meet
different candidate thresholds for a metric, to identify a threshold that
results in a good user experience.

### Achievable by existing web content

Additionally, to ensure that site owners can succeed in optimizing their sites
to meet the "good" thresholds, we require that these thresholds are achievable
for existing content on the web. For example, while zero milliseconds is an
ideal LCP "good" threshold, resulting in instant loading experiences, a zero
millisecond threshold is not practically achievable in most cases, due to
network and device processing latencies. Thus, zero milliseconds is not a
reasonable LCP "good" threshold for Core Web Vitals.

When evaluating candidate Core Web Vitals "good" thresholds, we verify that
those thresholds are achievable, based on data from the [Chrome User Experience
Report](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-user-experience-report)
(CrUX). To confirm that a threshold is achievable, we require that at least 10%
of [origins](/same-site-same-origin/#origin) currently meet the "good"
threshold. Additionally, to ensure that well-optimized sites are not
misclassified due to variability in field data,  we also verify that
well-optimized content consistently meets the "good" threshold.

Conversely, we establish the "poor" threshold by identifying a level of
performance that only a minority of origins are not currently meeting. Unless
there is research available relevant to defining a "poor" threshold, by default
the worst-performing 10-30% of origins are classified as "poor".

### Final thoughts on criteria

When evaluating candidate thresholds, we found that the criteria were sometimes
in conflict with one another. For example, there can be a tension between a
threshold being consistently achievable and it ensuring consistently good user
experiences. Additionally, given that human perception research typically
provides a range of values, and user behavior metrics show gradual changes in
behavior, we found there is often no single "correct" threshold for a metric.
Thus, our approach for the 2020 Core Web Vitals has been to choose thresholds
that best meet the above criteria, while recognizing that there is no one
perfect threshold and that we may sometimes need to choose from multiple
reasonable candidate thresholds. Rather than asking "what is the perfect
threshold?" we instead focused on asking "which candidate threshold best
achieves our criteria?"


## Choice of percentile

As noted earlier, to classify the overall performance of a page or site, we use
the 75th percentile value of all visits to that page or site. The 75th
percentile was chosen based on two criteria. First, the percentile should ensure
that a majority of visits to a page or site experienced the target level of
performance. Second, the value at the chosen percentile should not be overly
impacted by outliers.

These goals are somewhat at odds with one another. To satisfy the first goal, a
higher percentile is typically a better choice. However, with higher
percentiles, the likelihood of the resulting value being impacted by outliers
also increases. If a few visits to a site happen to be on flaky network
connections which result in excessively large LCP samples, we don't want our
site classification to be decided by these outlier samples. For example, if we
were evaluating the performance of a site with 100 visits using a high
percentile such as the 95th, it would take just 5 outlier samples for the 95th
percentile value to be affected by the outliers.

Given these goals are a bit at odds, after analysis, we concluded that the 75th
percentile strikes a reasonable balance. By using the 75th percentile, we know
that most visits to the site (3 of 4) experienced the target level of
performance or better. Additionally, the 75th percentile value is less likely to
be affected by outliers. Returning to our example, for a site with 100 visits,
25 of those visits would need to report large outlier samples for the value at
the 75th percentile to be affected by outliers. While 25 of 100 samples being
outliers is possible, it is much less likely than for the 95th percentile case.

## Largest Contentful Paint

### Quality of experience

1 second is often cited as the amount of time a user will wait before they begin
to lose focus on a task. On closer inspection of relevant research, we found
that 1 second is an approximation to describe a range of values, from roughly
several hundred milliseconds to several seconds.

Two commonly cited sources for the 1 second threshold are [Card et
al](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/108844.108874) and
[Miller](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1476589.1476628). Card defines a
1-second "immediate response" threshold, citing Newell's [Unified Theories of
Cognition](https://dl.acm.org/doi/book/10.5555/86564). Newell explains immediate
responses as "responses that must be made to some stimulus within _very
approximately one second_ (that is, roughly from ~0.3sec to ~3sec)." This
follows Newell's discussion on "real-time constraints on cognition", where it is
noted that "interactions with the environment which evoke cognitive
considerations take place on the order of seconds" which range from roughly 0.5
to 2-3 seconds. Miller, another commonly cited source for the 1 second
threshold, notes "tasks which humans can and will perform with machine
communications will seriously change their character if response delays are
greater than two seconds, with some possible extension of another second or so."

Miller and Card's research describes the amount of time a user will wait before
losing focus as a range, from roughly 0.3 to 3 seconds, which suggests our LCP
"good" threshold should be in this range. Additionally, given that the existing
First Contentful Paint "good" threshold is 1 second, and that the Largest
Contentful Paint typically occurs after First Contentful Paint, we further
constrain our range of candidate LCP thresholds, from 1 second to 3 seconds. To
choose the threshold in this range that best meets our criteria, we look at the
achievability of these candidate thresholds, below.

### Achievability

Using data from CrUX, we can determine the percentage of origins on the web that
meet our candidate LCP "good" thresholds.

**% of CrUX origins classified as "good" (for candidate LCP thresholds)**

<div class="w-table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>&nbsp;</th>
      <th>1 second</th>
      <th>1.5 seconds</th>
      <th>2 seconds</th>
      <th>2.5 seconds</th>
      <th>3 seconds</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>phone</strong></td>
      <td>3.5%</td>
      <td>13%</td>
      <td>27%</td>
      <td>42%</td>
      <td>55%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>desktop</strong></td>
      <td>6.9%</td>
      <td>19%</td>
      <td>36%</td>
      <td>51%</td>
      <td>64%</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

While less than 10% of origins meet the 1 second threshold, all other thresholds
from 1.5 to 3 seconds satisfy our requirement that at least 10% of origins meet
the "good" threshold, and are thus still valid candidates.

In addition, to ensure the chosen threshold is consistently achievable for
well-optimized sites, we analyze LCP performance for top-performing sites across
the web, to determine which thresholds are consistently achievable for these
sites. Specifically, we aim to identify a threshold that is consistently
achievable at the 75th percentile for top performing sites. We find that the 1.5
and 2 second thresholds are not consistently achievable, while 2.5 seconds is
consistently achievable.

To identify a "poor" threshold for LCP, we use CrUX data to identify a threshold
met by most origins:

**% of CrUX origins classified as "poor" (for candidate LCP thresholds)**

<div class="w-table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>&nbsp;</th>
      <th>3 seconds</th>
      <th>3.5 seconds</th>
      <th>4 seconds</th>
      <th>4.5 seconds</th>
      <th>5 seconds</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>phone</strong></td>
      <td>45%</td>
      <td>35%</td>
      <td>26%</td>
      <td>20%</td>
      <td>15%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>desktop</strong></td>
      <td>36%</td>
      <td>26%</td>
      <td>19%</td>
      <td>14%</td>
      <td>10%</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

For a 4 second threshold, roughly 26% of phone origins, and 21% of desktop
origins, would be classified as poor. This falls in our target range of 10-30%,
so we conclude that 4 seconds is an acceptable "poor" threshold.

Thus, we conclude that 2.5 seconds is a reasonable "good" threshold, and 4
seconds is a reasonable "poor" threshold for Largest Contentful Paint.

## First Input Delay

### Quality of experience

Research is reasonably consistent in concluding that delays in visual feedback
of up to around 100ms are perceived as being caused by an associated source,
such as a user input. This suggests that a 100ms First Input Delay "good"
threshold is likely appropriate as a minimum bar: if the delay for processing
input exceeds 100ms, there is no chance for other processing and rendering steps
to complete in time.

Jakob Nielsen's commonly cited [Response Times: The 3 Important
Limits](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/response-times-3-important-limits/)
defines 0.1 second as the limit for having the user feel that the system is
reacting instantaneously. Nielsen cites Miller and Card, who cites Michotte's
1962 [The Perception of
Causality](https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1964-05029-000). In Michotte's
research, experiment participants are shown "two objects on a screen. Object A
sets off and moves towards B. It stops at the moment when it comes into contact
with B, while the latter then starts and moves away from A." Michotte varies the
time interval between when Object A stops and when Object B starts to move.
Michotte finds that, for delays up to roughly 100ms, participants have the
impression that Object A causes the motion of Object B. For delays from roughly
100ms to 200ms, the perception of causality is mixed, and for delays over 200ms,
the motion of Object B is no longer seen as having been caused by Object A.

Similarly, Miller defines a response threshold for "Response to control
activation" as "the indication of action given, ordinarily, by the movement of a
key, switch or other control member that signals it has been physically
actIvated. This response should be&hellip;perceived as a part of the mechanical
action induced by the operator. Time delay: No more than 0.1 second" and later
"the delay between depressing a key and visual feedback should be no more than
0.1 to 0.2 seconds".

More recently, in [Towards the Temporally Perfect Virtual
Button](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2611387), Kaaresoja et al investigated
the perception of simultaneity between touching a virtual button on a
touchscreen and subsequent visual feedback indicating the button was touched,
for various delays. When the delay between button press and visual feedback was
85ms or less, participants reported the visual feedback appeared simultaneously
with the button press 75% of the time. Additionally, for delays of 100ms or
less, participants reported a consistently high perceived quality of the button
press, with perceived quality falling off for delays of 100ms to 150ms, and
reaching very low levels for delays of 300ms.

Given the above, we conclude that research points to a range of values around
100ms as an appropriate First Input Delay threshold for Web Vitals.
Additionally, given users reported low quality levels for delays of 300ms or
more, 300ms presents as a reasonable "poor" threshold.

### Achievability

Using data from CrUX, we determine that the majority of origins on the web meet
the 100ms FID "good" threshold at the 75th percentile:

**% of CrUX origins classified as "good" for FID 100ms threshold**

<div class="w-table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th>100ms</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>phone</strong></td>
      <td>78%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>desktop</strong></td>
      <td>>99%</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

Additionally, we observe that top sites across the web are able to consistently
meet this threshold at the 75th percentile (and often meet it at the 95th
percentile).

Given the above, we conclude that 100ms is a reasonable "good" threshold for
FID.

## Cumulative Layout Shift

### Quality of experience

Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS) is a new metric that measures how much the visible
content of a page shifts around. Given CLS is new, we are not aware of research
that can directly inform the thresholds for this metric. Thus, to identify a
threshold that is aligned with user expectations, we evaluated real-world pages
with different amounts of layout shift, to determine the maximum amount of shift
that is perceived as acceptable before causing significant disruptions when
consuming page content. In our internal testing, we found that levels of shift
from 0.15 and above were consistently perceived as disruptive, while shifts of
0.1 and below were noticeable but not excessively disruptive. Thus, while zero
layout shift is ideal, we concluded that values up to 0.1 are candidate "good"
CLS thresholds.

### Achievability

Based on CrUX data, we can see that nearly 50% of origins have CLS of 0.05 or
below.

**% of CrUX origins classified as "good" (for candidate CLS thresholds)**

<div class="w-table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>&nbsp;</th>
      <th>0.05</th>
      <th>0.1</th>
      <th>0.15</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>phone</strong></td>
      <td>49%</td>
      <td>60%</td>
      <td>69%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>desktop</strong></td>
      <td>42%</td>
      <td>59%</td>
      <td>69%</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

While the CrUX data suggests that 0.05 might be a reasonable CLS "good"
threshold, we recognize that there are some use cases where it is currently
difficult to avoid disruptive layout shifts. For example, for third-party
embedded content, such as social media embeds, the height of the embedded
content is sometimes not known until it finishes loading, which can lead to a
layout shift greater than 0.05. Thus, we conclude that, while many origins meet
the 0.05 threshold, the slightly less stringent CLS threshold of 0.1 strikes a
better balance between quality of experience and achievability. It is our hope
that, going forward, the web ecosystem will identify solutions to address layout
shifts caused by third party embeds, which would allow for using a more
stringent CLS "good" threshold of 0.05 or 0 in a future iteration of Core Web
Vitals.

Additionally, to determine a "poor" threshold for CLS, we used CrUX data to
identify a threshold met by most origins:

**% of CrUX origins classified as "poor" (for candidate CLS thresholds)**

<div class="w-table-wrapper">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>&nbsp;</th>
      <th>0.15</th>
      <th>0.2</th>
      <th>0.25</th>
      <th>0.3</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>phone</strong></td>
      <td>31%</td>
      <td>25%</td>
      <td>20%</td>
      <td>18%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong>desktop</strong></td>
      <td>31%</td>
      <td>23%</td>
      <td>18%</td>
      <td>16%</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

For a 0.25 threshold, roughly 20% of phone origins, and 18% of desktop origins,
would be classified as "poor". This falls in our target range of 10-30%, so we
concluded that 0.25 is an acceptable "poor" threshold.
