---
layout: post-old
title: Signed Exchanges (SXGs)
subhead: |
  An SXG is a delivery mechanism that makes it possible to authenticate the
  origin of a resource independently of how it was delivered.
authors:
  - katiehempenius
date: 2020-10-14
updated: 2021-04-21
hero: image/admin/6ll3P8MYWxvtb1ZjXIzb.jpg
alt: A pile of envelopes.
description: |
  An SXG is a delivery mechanism that makes it possible to authenticate the
  origin of a resource independently of how it was delivered.
tags:
  - blog
  - performance
---

A signed exchange (SXG) is a delivery mechanism that makes it possible to
authenticate the origin of a resource independently of how it was delivered.
This decoupling advances a variety of use cases such as privacy-preserving
prefetching, offline internet experiences, and serving from third-party caches.
Additionally, implementing SXGs can improve Largest Contentful Paint (LCP) for
some sites.

This article provides a comprehensive overview of SXGs: how they work, use cases, and tooling.

## Browser compatibility {: #browser-compatibility }

SXGs are [supported](https://caniuse.com/#feat=sxg) by Chromium-based browsers
(starting with versions: Chrome 73, Edge 79, and Opera 64).

## Overview

Signed Exchanges (SXGs) allow a site to cryptographically sign a
request/response pair (an "HTTP exchange") in a way that makes it possible for
the browser to verify the origin and integrity of the content independently of
how the content was distributed. As a result, the browser can display the URL of
the origin site in the address bar, rather than the URL of the server that
delivered the content.

The broader implication of SXGs is that they make content portable: content
delivered via a SXG can be easily distributed by third parties while maintaining
full assurance and attribution of its origin. Historically, the only way for a
site to use a third-party to distribute its content while maintaining
attribution has been for the site to share its SSL certificates with the
distributor. This has security drawbacks; moreover, it is a far stretch from
making content truly portable.

In the long-term, truly portable content can be utilized to achieve use cases
like fully offline experiences. In the immediate-term, the primary use case of
SXGs is the delivery of faster user experiences by providing content in an
easily cacheable format. Specifically, [Google Search](#google-search) will
cache and sometimes prefetch SXGs. For sites that receive a large portion of
their traffic from Google Search, SXGs can be an important tool for delivering
faster page loads to users.

### The SXG format

An SXG is encapsulated in a [binary-encoded](https://cbor.io/) file that has two
primary components: an HTTP exchange and a
[signature](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Glossary/Signature/Security).
The HTTP exchange consists of a request URL, content negotiation information,
and an HTTP response.

Here's an example of a decoded SXG file:

```html
format version: 1b3
request:
  method: GET
  uri: https://example.org/
  headers:
response:
  status: 200
  headers:
    Cache-Control: max-age=604800
    Digest: mi-sha256-03=kcwVP6aOwYmA/j9JbUU0GbuiZdnjaBVB/1ag6miNUMY=
    Expires: Mon, 24 Aug 2020 16:08:24 GMT
    Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
    Content-Encoding: mi-sha256-03
    Date: Mon, 17 Aug 2020 16:08:24 GMT
    Vary: Accept-Encoding
signature:
    label;cert-sha256=*ViFgi0WfQ+NotPJf8PBo2T5dEuZ13NdZefPybXq/HhE=*;
    cert-url="https://test.web.app/ViFgi0WfQ-NotPJf8PBo2T5dEuZ13NdZefPybXq_HhE";
    date=1597680503;expires=1598285303;integrity="digest/mi-sha256-03";sig=*MEUCIQD5VqojZ1ujXXQaBt1CPKgJxuJTvFlIGLgkyNkC6d7LdAIgQUQ8lC4eaoxBjcVNKLrbS9kRMoCHKG67MweqNXy6wJg=*;
    validity-url="https://example.org/webpkg/validity"
header integrity: sha256-Gl9bFHnNvHppKsv+bFEZwlYbbJ4vyf4MnaMMvTitTGQ=

The exchange has a valid signature.
payload [1256 bytes]:
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>SXG example</title>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
    <style type="text/css">
    body {
        background-color: #f0f0f2;
        margin: 0;
        padding: 0;
    }
    </style>
</head>
<body>
<div>
    <h1>Hello</h1>
</div>
</body>
</html>
```

The `expires` parameter in the signature indicates a SXG's expiration date. A
SXG may be valid for at most 7 days. If the expiration date of an SXG is more
than 7 days in the future, the browser will reject it. Find more information on
the signature header in the [Signed HTTP Exchanges
spec](https://wicg.github.io/webpackage/draft-yasskin-http-origin-signed-responses.html#section-3.1).


### Web Packaging

SXGs are a part of the broader [Web
Packaging](https://github.com/WICG/webpackage) spec proposal family. In addition
to SXGs, the other major component of the Web Packaging spec is [Web Bundles](/web-bundles/)
("bundled HTTP exchanges"). Web Bundles are a collection of HTTP resources and
the metadata necessary to interpret the bundle.

The relationship between SXGs and Web Bundles is a common point of confusion.
SXGs and Web Bundles are two distinct technologies that don't depend on each
other—Web Bundles can be used with both signed and unsigned exchanges. The common
goal advanced by both SXGs and Web Bundles is the creation of a "web packaging"
format that allows sites to be shared in their entirety for offline consumption.

SXGs are the first part of the Web Packaging spec that Chromium-based browsers will implement.

## Loading SXGs

Initially, the primary use case of SXGs will likely be as a delivery mechanism
for a page's main document. For this use case, a SXG could be referenced using
the `<link>` or `<a>` tags, as well as the [`Link`
header](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Link). Like
other resources, a SXG can be loaded by entering its URL in the browser's
address bar.

```html
<a href="https://example.com/article.html.sxg">
```

```html
<link rel="prefetch" as="document" href="https://example.com/article.html.sxg">
```

SXGs can also be used to deliver subresources. For more information, refer to
[Signed Exchange subresource
substitution](https://github.com/WICG/webpackage/blob/main/explainers/signed-exchange-subresource-substitution.md).


## Serving SXGs

### Content negotiation

[Content
negotiation](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Content_negotiation)
is a mechanism for serving different representations of the same resource at the
same URL depending on the capabilities and preferences of a client—for example,
serving the gzip version of a resource to some clients but the Brotli version to
others. Content negotiation makes it possible to serve both SXG and non-SXG
representations of the same content depending on a browser's capabilities.

Web browsers use the
[`Accept`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Accept)
request header to communicate the [MIME
types](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_types)
they support. If a browser supports SXGs, the MIME type
`application/signed-exchange` will automatically be included in this list of
values.

For example, this is the `Accept` header sent by Chrome 84:

```json
accept:
text/html,
application/xhtml+xml,
application/xml;q=0.9,
image/webp,image/apng,
\*/\*;q=0.8,
application/signed-exchange;v=b3;q=0.9
```

The `application/signed-exchange;v=b3;q=0.9` portion of this string informs the
web server that Chrome supports SXGs—specifically, version `b3`. The last part
`q=0.9` indicates the
[q-value](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Glossary/Quality_values).

The `q-value` expresses a browser's relative preference for a particular format
using a decimal scale from `0` to `1`, with `1` representing the highest
priority. When a `q-value` is not supplied for a format, `1` is the implied
value.

### Best practices

Servers should serve SXGs when the `Accept` header indicates that the `q-value`
for `application/signed-exchange` is greater than or equal to the `q-value` for
`text/html`. In practice, this means that an origin server will serve SXGs to
crawlers, but not browsers.

SXGs can deliver superior performance when used with caching or prefetching.
However, for content that is loaded directly from the origin server without the
benefit of these optimizations, `text/html` delivers better performance than
SXGs. Serving content as SXG allows crawlers and other intermediaries to cache
SXGs for faster delivery to users.

The following regular expression can be used to match the `Accept` header of
requests that should be served as SXG:

```regex
Accept: /(^|,)\s\*application\/signed-exchange\s\*;\s\*v=[[:alnum:]\_-]+\s\*(,|$)/
```

Note that the subexpression `(,|$)` matches headers where the `q-value` for SXG
has been omitted; this omission implies a `q-value` of `1` for SXG. Although an
`Accept` header could theoretically contain the substring `q=1`, [in
practice](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Content_negotiation/List_of_default_Accept_values)
browsers don't explicitly list a format's `q-value` when it has the default
value of `1`.

## Debugging SXGs with Chrome DevTools {: #debugging }

Signed Exchanges can be identified by looking for `signed-exchange` in the
**Type** column of the **Network** panel in Chrome DevTools.

<figure class="w-figure">
  {% Img src="image/admin/cNdohSaeXqGHFBwD7L3B.png", alt="Screenshot showing a SXG request within the 'Network' panel in DevTools", width="696", height="201" %}
  <figcaption>The <b>Network</b> panel in DevTools</figcaption>
</figure>

The **Preview** tab provides more information about the contents of a SXG.

<figure class="w-figure">
  {% Img src="image/admin/E0rBwuxk4BxFmLJ3gXhP.png", alt="Screenshot of the 'Preview' tab for a SXG", width="800", height="561" %}
  <figcaption>The <b>Preview</b> tab in DevTools</figcaption>
</figure>

To see a SXG firsthand, visit this [demo](https://signed-exchange-testing.dev/)
in [one of the browsers that supports SXG](#browser-compatibility)

## Use cases

SXGs can be used to deliver content directly from an origin server to a user—but
this would largely defeat the purpose of SXGs. Rather, the intended use and
benefits of SXGs are primarily achieved when the SXGs generated by an origin
server are cached and served to users by an intermediary.

Although this section primarily discusses the caching and serving of SXGs by
Google Search, it is a technique that is applicable to any site that wishes to
provide its outlinks with a faster user experience or greater resiliency to
limited network access. This not only includes search engines and social media
platforms, but also information portals that serve content for offline
consumption.

### Google Search

{% Img src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/oMtUUAVj5hAGwBZMDwct.png", alt="Diagram showing a prefetched SXG being served from a cache.", width="800", height="396" %}

Google Search uses SXGs to provide users with a faster page load experience for
pages loaded from the search results page. Sites that receive significant
traffic from Google Search can potentially see significant performance
improvements by serving content as SXG.

Google Search will now crawl, cache, and prefetch SXGs when applicable. Google
and other search engines sometimes
[prefetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Link_prefetching_FAQ)
content that the user is likely to visit—for example, the page corresponding to
the first search result. SXGs are particularly well suited to prefetching
because of their privacy benefits over non-SXG formats.

{% Aside %}
There is a certain amount of user information inherent to all network requests
regardless of how or why they were made: this includes information like IP
address, the presence or absence of cookies, and the value of headers like
`Accept-Language`. This information is "disclosed" to the destination server
when a request is made. Because SXGs are prefetched from a cache, rather than
the origin server, a user's interest in a site will only be disclosed to the
origin server once the user navigates to the site, rather than at the time of
prefetching. In addition, content prefetched via SXG does not set cookies or
access `localStorage` unless the content is loaded by the user. Furthermore,
this reveals no new user information to the SXG referrer. The use of SXGs for
prefetching is an example of the concept of privacy-preserving prefetching.
{% endAside %}

#### Crawling

The
[`Accept`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Content_negotiation)
header sent by the Google Search crawler expresses an equal preference for
`text/html` and `application/signed-exchange`. As described in the [previous
section](#best-practices), sites that wish to use SXGs should serve them when
the `Accept` header of a request expresses an equal or greater preference for
SXGs over `text/html`. In practice, only crawlers will express a preference for
SXGs over `text/html`.

#### Indexing

The SXG and non-SXG representations of a page are not ranked or indexed
separately by Google Search. SXG is ultimately a delivery mechanism—it does not
change the underlying content. Given this, it would not make sense for Google
Search to separately index or rank the same content delivered in different ways.

#### Web Vitals

For sites that receive a significant portion of their traffic from Google
Search, SXGs can be used to improve [Web Vitals](/vitals/)—namely
[LCP](https://web.dev/lcp/). Cached and prefetched SXGs can be delivered to
users incredibly quickly and this yields a faster LCP. Although SXGs can be a
powerful tool, they work best when combined with other performance optimizations
such as use of CDNs and reduction of render-blocking subresources.

### AMP

AMP content can be delivered using SXG. SXG allows AMP content to be prefetched
and displayed using its canonical URL, rather than its AMP URL.

All of the concepts described in this document still apply to the AMP use case,
however, AMP has its own separate
[tooling](https://github.com/ampproject/amppackager) for generating SXGs.

{% Aside%}
Learn how to serve AMP using signed exchanges on
[amp.dev](https://amp.dev/documentation/guides-and-tutorials/optimize-and-measure/signed-exchange/).
{% endAside %}


## Tooling

Implementing SXGs consists of generating the SXG corresponding to a given URL
and then serving that SXG to requestors (usually crawlers). To generate a SXG
you will need a certificate that can sign SXGs.

### Certificates

Production use of SXGs requires a certificate that supports the
`CanSignHttpExchanges` extension. Per
[spec](https://wicg.github.io/webpackage/draft-yasskin-http-origin-signed-responses.html#section-4.2),
certificates with this extension must have a validity period no longer than 90
days and require that the requesting domain have a [DNS CAA
record](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNS_Certification_Authority_Authorization)
configured.

[This page](https://github.com/google/webpackager/wiki/Certificate-Authorities)
lists the certificate authorities that can issue this type of certificate.
Certificates for SXGs are only available through a commercial certificate
authority.

### Platform-specific SXG tooling

These tools support specific technology stacks. If you are already using a
platform supported by one of these tools, you may find it easier to set up than
a general-purpose tool.

- [`sxg-rs/cloudflare_worker`](https://github.com/google/sxg-rs/tree/main/cloudflare_worker)
  runs on [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/).

- [`sxg-rs/fastly_compute`](https://github.com/google/sxg-rs/tree/main/fastly_compute)
  runs on [Fastly
  Compute@Edge](https://www.fastly.com/products/edge-compute/serverless).

- [Automatic Signed
  Exchanges](https://blog.cloudflare.com/automatic-signed-exchanges/) is a
  Cloudflare feature that automatically acquires certificates and generates
  Signed Exchanges.

- [NGINX SXG module](https://github.com/google/nginx-sxg-module) generates
  and serves SXGs for sites that use [nginx](https://nginx.org/). Setup
  instructions can be found [here](/how-to-set-up-signed-http-exchanges/).

- [Envoy SXG
  Filter](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/sxg_filter)
  generates and serves SXGs for sites that use
  [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/).

### General-purpose SXG tooling

#### Web Packager CLI

The [Web Packager CLI](https://github.com/google/webpackager) generates a SXG
corresponding to a given URL.

```shell
webpackager \
    --private\_key=private.key \
    --cert\_url=https://example.com/certificate.cbor \
    --url=https://example.com
```

Once the SXG file has been generated, upload it to your server and serve it with
the `application/signed-exchange;v=b3` MIME type. In addition, you will need to
serve the SXG certificate as `application/cert-chain+cbor`.

#### Web Packager Server

The [Web Packager
server](https://github.com/google/webpackager/blob/main/cmd/webpkgserver/README.md),
`webpkgserver`, acts as a [reverse
proxy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_proxy) for serving SXGs. Given a
URL, `webpkgserver` will fetch the URL's contents, package them as an SXG, and
serve the SXG in response. For instructions on setting up the Web Packager
server, see [How to set up signed exchanges using Web
Packager](/signed-exchanges-webpackager).

### SXG libraries

These libraries could be used to build your own SXG generator:

- [`sxg_rs`](https://github.com/google/sxg-rs/tree/main/sxg_rs) is a Rust library for
  generating SXGs. It is the most featureful SXG library and is used as the
  basis for the `cloudflare_worker` and `fastly_compute` tools.

- [`libsxg`](https://github.com/google/libsxg) is a minimal C library for
  generating SXGs. It is used as the basis for the NGINX SXG module and the
  Envoy SXG Filter.

- [`go/signed-exchange`](https://github.com/WICG/webpackage/tree/main/go/signedexchange)
  is a minimal Go library provided by the webpackage specification as a
  [reference
  implementation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reference_implementation) of
  generating SXGs. It is used as the basis for its reference CLI tool,
  [`gen-signedexchange`](https://github.com/WICG/webpackage/tree/main/go/signedexchange)
  and the more featureful Web Packager tools.

## Conclusion

Signed Exchanges are a delivery mechanism that make it possible to verify the
origin and validity of a resource independently of how the resource was
delivered. As a result, SXGs can be distributed by third-parties while
maintaining full publisher attribution.

## Further reading

*   [Draft spec for Signed HTTP Exchanges](https://wicg.github.io/webpackage/draft-yasskin-http-origin-signed-responses.html)
*   [Web Packaging explainers](https://github.com/WICG/webpackage/tree/main/explainers)
*   [Get started with signed exchanges on Google Search](https://developers.google.com/search/docs/advanced/experience/signed-exchange)
*   [How to set up Signed Exchanges using Web Packager](https://web.dev/signed-exchanges-webpackager)
*   [Demo of Signed Exchanges](https://signed-exchange-testing.dev/)
