---
title: Virtual reality comes to the web
subhead: A few basicis will prepare you for a spectrum of immersives experiences&#58; virtual reality, augmented reality, and everything in between.
authors:
  - joemedley
date: 2019-10-30
hero: hero.jpg
alt: A person using a virtual reality headset.
description:
  Virtual reality has come to the web in Chrome 79. Based on the WebXR Device
  API, this launch is the foundation for immersive features to come later such
  as augmented reality. Other browsers are coming soon, including [update before
  launch].
tags:
  - post
  - ar
  - augmented-reality
  - virtual-reality
  - vr
  - webxr
---

Virtual reality has come to the web in Chrome 79. Based on the WebXR Device API,
this launch is the foundation for immersive features to come later such as
augmented reality. Other browsers are coming soon, including [update before
launch].

If you've followed the progress of immersive experiences on the web, you know
there has been much experimentation in the last few years. An early WebVR spec
implementation, released in 2017 in Firefox and 2018 in Chrome behind a flag,
proved inadequate for [various
reasons](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/05/welcome-to-immersive#what_happened_to_webvr_11).
The effort to correct its shortcomings blossomed last year into the [WebXR
Device API](https://www.w3.org/TR/webxr/). It was in an origin trial for a
while, and now we're enabling by default.

## What is the immersive web?

Though we use two terms to describe immersive experiences&mdash;augmented reality and virtual reality&mdash;they can be thought of on a spectrum from complete reality to completely virtual, with various degrees of immersion in between.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--center">
  <img src="./immersive-specgtrum.png" width="486" height="499" />
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    The spectrum of immersive experiences
  </figcaption>
</figure

Examples of immersive experiences include:

* Games
* 360Â° videos
* Traditional 2D (or 3D) videos presented in immersive surroundings
* Home buying
* Viewing products in your home before you buy them
* Immersive art
* Something cool nobody's thought of yet

## What will I cover?

This article is part one of a series and focuses specifically on setting up a
basic WebXR application and constructing what's called a frame loop, the
workhorse of an immersive experience. Later articles will cover drawing material
to a screen and interacting with input devices. Though Chrome only supports
virtual reality for now, everything I cover in this and succeeding articles
applies equally to both AR and VR sessions.

## Concepts and usage

I'll explain a few basics of using the WebXR Device API. If you need more depth
than I've provided, check out the Immersive Web Working Group's WebXR Samples or
MDN's burgeoning reference materials. If you're familiar with early versions of
the WebXR Device API, you should glance over all of this material. There have
been changes.

The code in this article, which is based on the Immersive Web Working Group's
barebones sample (demo, source), is edited for clarity and simplicity. Other
samples are available.

Part of the effort in establishing the WebXR specification has been fleshing out
security and privacy measures to protect end users. To that end that
implementations adhere to certain requirements. A web page or app must be active
and focused before it can request anything sensitive from the viewer. Web pages
or apps must be served over HTTPS. The API itself is designed to protect
information obtained from sensors and cameras, which it needs in order to
function.

### Requesting a session

Entering an XR session requires a user gesture. To get that, use feature
detection and make a call to `isSessionSupported()`. In the example below, I've
indicated that I want a virtual reality session with the `'immersive-vr'`
session type. Other session types are available. Once I know that virtual
reality sessions are supported, I enable a button that allows me to acquire a
user gesture.

```js
if (navigator.xr) {
  const supported = await navigator.xr.isSessionSupported('immersive-vr');
  if (supported) {
    xrButton.addEventListener('click', onButtonClicked);
    xrButton.innerHTML = 'Enter VR';
    xrButton.disabled = false;
  }
}
```

After enabling the button, I wait for a click event to request a session.

```js
function onButtonClicked() {
  if (!xrSession) {
    navigator.xr.requestSession('immersive-vr')
    .then((session) => {
      xrSession = session;
      xrButton.innerHTML = 'Exit XR';
      onSessionStarted(xrSession);
    });
  } else {
    xrSession.end();
}
```

Notice the object hierarchy in this code. It moves from `navigator` to `xr` to
an `XRSession` instance. In early versions of the API, a script had to request a
device, then a session. Now, the device is acquired implicitly.

### Entering a session

After getting a session, I need to start it and enter it. But first, I need to
set up a few things. Session needs an `onend` event handler so that the app or
web page can be reset when the user exits.

I'll also need a `<canvas>` element to draw my scene on. It needs to be an XR
compatible WebGL context. All drawing is done using the WebGL API.

Now that I have a place to draw a scene, I need a source of content to draw on
it. For that, I create an instance of `XRWebGLLayer`. I associate it with the
canvas by calling `XRSession.updateRenderState()`.

Once I'm in a session, I need a way of determining where things are in virtual
reality. I'll need a reference space. A `'local-floor'` reference space is one
where the origin is located near the viewer and the y-axis is 0 at floor level
and is not expected to move. There are [other types of reference
spaces](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XRSession/requestReferenceSpace),
but that is a more complicated topic than I can go into here. I save the
reference space to a variable because I'll need it when I draw to the screen.

```js
function onSessionStarted(xrSession) {
  xrSession.addEVentListener('end', onSessionEnded);

  let canvas = document.createElement('canvas');
  gl = canvas.getContext('webgl', { xrCompatible: true });

  xrSession.updateRenderState({
    baseLayer: new XRWebGLLayer(session, gl)
  });

  xrSession.requestReferenceSpace('local-floor')
  .then((refSpace) => {
    xrRefSpace = refSpace;
    xrSession.requestAnimationFrame(onXRFrame);
  });
}
```

After getting a reference space, I call `XRSession.requestAnimationFrame()`.
This is the start of presenting virtual content, which is done in the frame
loop.

### Running a frame loop

The frame loop is a user-agent controlled infinite loop in which content is
repeatedly drawn to the screen. Content is drawn in discrete blocks called
frames. The succession of such frames creates the illusion of movement. The
number of frames per second currently varies between devices, and may be
anything from 60 to 144, but that has no bearing on your code.

The basic process for the frame loop is:

1. Call `XRSession.requestAnimationFrame()`. In response, the user agent invokes the `XRFrameRequestCallback`, which is defined by you.
1. Inside your callback function:
   1. Call `XRSession.requestAnimationFrame()` again.
   1. Query for the position (called a pose in WebXR) of the viewer.
   1. Draw content from the viewer's point of view.
   1. Process user input.

In this section I'll mainly cover steps 2a and 2b. I'll cover the remaining
steps in later installments.

#### The XRFrameRequestCallback

The `XRFrameRequestCallback` is defined by you. It takes two parameters: a
`DOMHighResTimeStamp` and an `XRFrame` instance. The `XRFrame` object provides
the information needed to render a single frame to the display. The
`DOMHighResTimeStamp` argument is for future use.

Before doing anything else, I'm going to request the next animation frame. As
previously stated, the timing of the next frame is determined by the user agent
based on the underlying hardware. Requesting it first ensures that if something
during the callback throws an error it's easier to ensure that the frame loop is
still running.

```js
function onXRFrame(hrTime, xrFrame) {
  let xrSession = xrFrame.session;
  session.requestAnimationFrame(onXRFrame);
  // Render a frame.
}
```

#### Getting poses

Before drawing anything on the screen, I need to know where the viewer is in
immersive space. The position and orientation of a thing in immersive space is
called a pose. Both viewers and input devices have a pose. Both viewer and input
device poses are defined as an `XRRigidTransform`, which consists of a position
vector and an orientation quaternion. I get the viewer's pose by calling
`XRFrame.getViewerPose()` on the current animation frame. I pass it the
reference space I acquired when I set up the session.

```js/3-6
function onXRFrame(hrTime, xrFrame) {
  let xrSession = xrFrame.session;
  session.requestAnimationFrame(onXRFrame);
  let xrViewerPose = xrFrame.getViewerPose(xrRefSpace);
  if (pose) {
    // Render based on the pose.
  }
}
```

#### Drawing the views

After checking the pose, it's time to draw something. The `XRViewerPose`
contains an array of `XRView` interfaces which represents a display or a portion
of a display and return the information needed to render content that's
correctly position for the device and the viewer such as the field of view, eye
offset, and other optical properties. Since I'm drawing for two eyes, I have two
views, which I loop through and draw a separate image for each.

If I were implementing for phone-based augmented reality, I would have only one
view, but I'd still loop through them. This is an important difference between
WebXR and other immersive systems. Though it may seem pointless to iterate
through one view, doing so allows you to have a single rendering path for a
spectrum of immersive experiences.

One thing I didn't cover is how to draw to the screen. That's done layer objects
such as the `XRWebGLLayer' interface and a means of drawing graphics such as the
WebGL APIs or the Three.js framework. It's such a lengthy subject it will be
covered in a later article.

```js/5-7
function onXRFrame(hrTime, xrFrame) {
  let xrSession = xrFrame.session;
  session.requestAnimationFrame(onXRFrame);
  let xrViewerPose = xrFrame.getViewerPose(xrRefSpace);
  if (xrViewerPose) {
    let glLayer = xrSession.renderState.baseLayer;
    // Use the baseLayer and WebGL to draw something.
    for (let xrView of xrViewerPose.views) {
      // Draw something to the screen.
    }
  }
}
```

### End the session

An immersive session may end for several reasons including ending by your own
code through a call to `XRSession.end()`. Other causes include the headset being
disconnected or another application taking control of it. This is why a
well-behaved application should monitor the `end` event. When it occurs, discard
the session and render objects. An immersive session, once ended, cannot be
resumed.

Recall from [Entering a session](#entering-a-session) that during setup, I added
an `onend` event handler.

```js
function onSessionStarted(xrSession) {
  xrSession.addEVentListener('end', onSessionEnded);
  // More setupâ¦
}
```

Inside the event handler, restore the state of the app before the user entered a
session.

```js
function onSessionEnded(event) {
  xrSession = null;
  xrButton.innerHTML = 'Enter VR';
}
```

## Conclusion

Now that I've shown you how the frame loop works, you should have enough to at
least make sense of sample code. Hopefully that's enough to start experimenting.
In the next article, I'll cover a bit about WebGL and how it interacts with
certain WebXR interfaces.

Photo by [JESHOOTS.COM](https://unsplash.com/@jeshoots?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)
